# Plot the output of ORFold

## INFO

The user has also the option to create a plot of the 


### Plot through the ORFold command

If the user wishes to get the foldability distribution plot at the end of the foldability calculation from ORFold he can just add in the command line of ORFold the selection **True** with the **-plot** label.

	orfold -fna sequences.fasta -options HIT -gff sequences.gff -plot True

This example will launch the calculation of the three methods with ORFold, will generate a GFF file for each method and at the end will produce a plot of the HCA score distribution for the sequences in the **sequences.fasta** file 

### Plot independent tab files with plot_orfold 
The output table generated by ORFold can be used by plot_orfold to generate a plot of the HCA score distribution. Of course the user can provide multiple tables in order to create a comparative plot of different sets of sequences (the table files pass with the **-tab** label). By default, the names used in the legend of the plot are the root names of the table files. However, if the user wishes to write his own names in the legend he can pass them with the **-names** labels. The names must be given in the same order as the table files. 

	plot_orfold -tab sequences_Y.tab sequences_X.tab sequences_Z.tab

This example will generate the HCA score distribution between the sequences in sequences_Y.tab, sequences_X.tab and sequences_Z.tab files and the legend will write sequences_Y, sequences_X, sequences_Z. 

	plot_orfold -tab sequences_Y.tab sequences_X.tab sequences_Z.tab -names Noncoding Coding Translated

This example will generate the HCA score distribution between the sequences in sequences_Y.tab, sequences_X.tab and sequences_Z.tab files and the legend will write Noncoding, Coding and Translated, respectively.

<div class="admonition note">
    <p class="first admonition-title">
        Note
    </p>
    <p class="last">
        If the names consist of a sigle word the user can write them the one after the other as shown in the example above. However, if the user wishes to use multiple words in every legend label (ie Noncoding sequences - Homo sapiens , Coding sequences - Homo sapiens, Translated sequences - Homo sapiens) they must be enclosed in double quotes. 
```{}
	plot_orfold -tab sequences_Y.tab sequences_X.tab sequences_Z.tab -names "Noncoding sequences - Homo sapiens" "Coding sequences - Homo sapiens" "Translated sequences - Homo sapiens"
```
    </p>
</div>
